[Music]
so this is a theater that we're in right
now what do you guys use this for what's
the story behind this location for this
theater every we use this for everything
so when sometimes we have guest speakers
come in here for large presentations
sometimes presentations about process
sometimes for presentations about
creative that's going on I think the
studio I mean this particular room is
used for anything and everything I've
been in here for everything from hey how
do we want to fix our role descriptions
- hey we have this wonderful speaker
coming in that's a great graphic
designer named Bethany heck who's gonna
talk to all the graphic designers at the
studio about you know her what her
process is Katherine cool well I am
joined right now by Laura DeYoung who is
the head of art for Riot Games but also
the art director for League of Legends
you have two titles I do so how does
that work so how that works is primarily
I'm focused on League of Legends so
League of Legends it's like quality
consistency of the art making sure we
have the right artist working on the
right products right it's just so sort
of matching them up with different
features so that's that's primarily what
I'm doing but head of art that is
thinking about the again quality meaning
like quality talent and culture
worldwide at Riot and the way I manage
to do both of those things at the same
time is that most of my time as a set is
dedicated to league but I work with
other art leaders and art directors sort
of as a as a as a work group so can you
can you give me an example like can you
give me an example of because everyone
will think well isn't that the same
thing like you
you guys come out with a skin and you
need art for that skin but when you're
working with other art direct like
leaders across from different areas of
the world what is an example of a
project like that so I don't really have
an example of a project like that
because that is that would apply more to
and I've only just started doing this
like other art leaders on other teams
would be helping think about where the
art department needs to go for the
future decisions for League of Legends
and what we want to do with the art
League of Legends happens on the League
of Legends team with the art leads and
our
that are there okay so future games
unannounced projects that type of thing
you're you're kind of helping to to work
around with that we're how did you end
up getting into all the stuff have you
always worked in the video game industry
or kind of how did you get your start no
no I started out working in interactive
so so at the time when I graduated from
college I was doing graphic design
interactive graphic design and I love
video games but I thought because like
the world wide web was all new mm-hmm so
to give you an idea of like how long ago
were talking in the 90s I worked on the
first Nike comic nike didn't have a
website oh nice so they called us one
day and they said there's this interwebs
thing and we think we should be on it so
I thought that I thought that all the
game industry was just going to be there
like in the next five years all the
games were going to be this interactive
creature that lived on the web and as
things progressed and as the dot-com
bust happened it dawned on me that that
wasn't going to happen anytime soon so I
very quickly wanted to switch directly
into the games industry so that is that
that happened I guess like 13 years ago
14 years ago I switched to the games
industry where did you end up landing it
for your first job Electronic Arts okay
so we're good yeah yeah I did very
really a really lucky really lucky break
a really lucky shot I knew some people
there and I I just I it's really hard to
explain how badly I wanted to be in a
games industry I was ready to not joking
I said like hey I'll live on a you know
in a garage if I have to I'll do
whatever I have to do to get out of the
web industry and be in the games
industry so EA is who gave me my shot
well why did you want to be in the games
industry so bad were you playing a lot
of games I always have always played a
lot of games so when okay so how do I
describe this ever since you know and
your kid you love playing games Ryan I
love playing imagination games but I
think that was something it was
different for me was that as I started
to become a tween like around you know
13 nobody plays imagination games
anymore it's not cool you know you can't
run around and pretend that you're
fighting for the Alliance the
with your friends anymore because that
looks weird and I still had some friends
who would play those games with me past
the point that it was acceptable you
know and but I knew that was going away
so for me that I just know I was gonna
do with myself like I can't sit any
instyle on the floor and like read teen
magazines with with with my friends it
was really boring so I started to write
a lot so I could be in an imaginary
world play I already played video games
I started playing more vio games and
started playing a lot of Dungeons and
Dragons that was like a way I could
transition and still be look relatively
adult teenager becoming adult without
running around in the backyard
pretending I was like a you know a druid
priestess with my best friend sure which
which did happen okay let's get the
dough so so then what we're what were
some of the games that you really
enjoyed as you were is you were getting
more and more into them right like for
me world of warcraft is like a very
formative example of that or even like
StarCraft brood war but for you what
were some of the games that you enjoyed
early on well I was playing I mean the
earliest games I was on a Atari 2600 so
I was playing a lot of like mega mania I
played on in television and by the way
weirdly almost all of my I associated
video games with girls because it was
all of my girlfriends that had consoles
oh really
the boys we all play it I played with
both groups and all the boys we played
outside a lot of physical games but the
girls that I played was we always played
on console so I played a lot of Donkey
Kong and Frogger and and then we'd go to
the arcade I loved gauntlet although I'm
left-handed by the way it's impossible
to play games and the arcade when you're
lefty because you're like like gauntlet
was near impossible but so those are the
games that I first really got me into
gaming but I think probably if there was
a game that was like a like one of the
most pivotal moments for me was
EverQuest because that was the moment
where I realized like hey I don't I can
still play this crazy imagination game
where I feel like I'm running around
with people pretending to be something
else than what I am because that is what
I missed from playing those games when I
was a kid like I don't actually don't
really want to grow up no ever so
EverQuest to me was I don't know how
much of my life I lost to ever Quest
I had a bunch of friends that played it
with me and that was huge
by playing in this world with all these
people and creating my own character and
stories and it was great so fast-forward
you end up at ei what did you end up
doing a TA what projects did you work on
first game was a game called marvel
nemesis it was a fighting game so it was
a marvel fighting game so that was the
first thing that I worked on and then I
worked on NBA Street home core which was
us what yeah I was a was a basketball
game I didn't know very much about
basketball I had to spend a lot of time
watching movies like hoop dreams reading
books to try to understand better the
basketball culture was that hard for you
because you got another games industry
you're probably thinking you're gonna
help design like immersive worlds where
people can be Giroud priestesses and all
that way but instead suddenly you're
figuring out how to do the art for a
basketball was there any ever moments
where you're like I may be the video
game industry isn't gonna work out for
me no no I never had that moment I okay
let me say this I think that you can
often find something creative and almost
anything you're doing and NBA Street
homecourt was incredibly creative
because it was all about reconnecting
with your hometown and the stories that
players have about their hometown and
growing up playing basketball so that
was very very beautiful to me and I very
much enjoyed that part of it and it
wasn't quite the same as an imagination
like an imagination world but there were
still stories and I think the stories is
what made it compelling for me
where'd you go after EA after EA I went
to a small startup company that was sort
of like a third party to Ubisoft and
that's how I ended up at Ubisoft
Montreal so it was just there for a
short time and then I immediately went
to UB much role okay so what what did
you work on at Ubisoft I worked on
Assassin's Creed 2 and I worked on Far
Cry 3
what were those projects like in
particular we were talking a little bit
beforehand like I I really enjoyed this
has its Creed in the past and it's it
must be kind of interesting for you to
kind of merge like the Technol
ah feel with sort of that aesthetic of
the you know history from that time yes
I loved working on Assassin's Creed 2 it
was such a fun game and one of the most
incredible teams I think in the in the
industry at that time the velocity on
that team was crazy but yeah it was
that was a huge creative challenge
because how we would the Renaissance is
such an interesting time period but it's
hard to realize it in a video game
without it looking a little silly
there's a lot of lace you know a lot of
very fancy outfits and it was to try to
put the Animus in that setting was not
the easiest thing I ended up creating a
whole bunch of I guess like you know
style guides and rules for the Animus
and it would be things like hey Ezio can
wear a lace but the Animas can't because
people were having a hard time figuring
out how do we make this technology merge
with the with a Renaissance setting and
the way we did it in the end was mostly
through our color palettes which you
know we went with these sort of like
rich Reds and still with the at with the
animus and assassins whites so we mostly
used color but we always let the animus
look sleek and technological and just
allow it to be a sharp contrast to the
historical elements in the game so how
did you how did you make the jump to
riot because you moved across a
continent to get here so what what was
that transition how did you decide why
did you decide to come here I am I've
always been more of a PC gamer and you
know there was that whole time where
they were like PC games are dying
they're gonna be dead and and I I didn't
feel that way I was playing also a lot
of World of Warcraft I rated for years
and I was almost always on PC I loved I
loved Ubisoft Ubisoft everybody there
was very console like a very console
gaming community and being more on the
PC side I'm just actually more
interested in PC games I had a friend at
work that introduced me to League of
Legends his name is Cory he was playing
a ton of League of Legends so I was just
at one of those points in your career
where I had shipped some games I was
very satisfied with and I was starting
to think about
ship another game like that another
console game or do I want to do
something completely different and what
interested me about riot was working on
a MOBA was the League of Legends
franchise which was at that time very
intriguing because it was everything and
the idea of working on a game that's
continuously shipping which I had never
done everything for me was based on one
deadline one box product so all of those
challenges were fascinating and I knew
too that they were doing a lot of work
building their IP or figuring what which
direction they wanted to take it so I
don't all that was inspiring so I talked
to riot and then I decided I wanted to
move here so you landed that right how
long ago did you join the company five
and a half years five and a half years
yeah what and I'm sure you know you've
probably grown into this role as head of
art yeah so what was your first role my
first role was the head of the
discipline of visual design so so that's
very wordy it is it is so visual design
is like think about the its graphic
design so it's all of the in-game menus
HUD branding a lot of the 2d so that is
back in the day the art department was
divided all by sub disciplines so
imagine like animation and character
environment and VFX and each one of
those had their own discipline lead so I
came in in a role like that so I was
that I was in that role for I guess over
two years and then I transitioned to the
art director of League of Legends role
it's gonna be three years in September
okay and then a head of art is more
recent
it's like a month okay well
congratulations Thanks
so what what have been some of the
unique challenges that you have faced
Riot because still kind of a younger
company growing like that I know the
sort of the cliche that I've heard a
million times is like building the plane
while it's in the air what what has sort
of been the unique experiences that
you've had here and some of the unique
challenges the continuous shipping the
thing that brought me here that has been
a unique experience and a unique
challenge the what's great about it is
that you are you are always shipping and
if you make a mistake you can update it
two weeks there's all these things that
like these sort of like opportunities
for you to fix things or add things or
do whatever you want to the game the the
challenge is that sometimes you don't
have a real sense of completion where
there's that final push where everybody
comes together on a console game and you
have to make a whole bunch of decisions
that can't be undone and you have to
live with it and all of your mistakes
together as a team and ship that thing
it brings people together in a very
unique way and it can be hard to capture
that own league because all the
different teams all the different
feature teams are shipping all the time
and I'm not saying people don't come
together to ship something but there
isn't that moment of pause or everyone's
like like there's nothing we can do now
it's out there let's go on a vacation
yeah and that's like I can't even walk
away from this game for a few months and
get some perspective on what just
happened and often it's several months
that you get that perspective before you
have to jump back in so it's challenging
here because you often don't get that
moment cuz you just start constantly
rolling on to the next thing so you have
to make those spaces for yourself
otherwise it's very hard to have
perspective on your work
there must be something so like when you
really sit champion you can't you're not
going to do like maybe a couple years
later you'll do like a visual upgrade or
change or something to it by like I
don't see too many changes to champions
after they hit or maybe there are
changes than there's subtle and I'm
missing them but it or even like a map
rework like those those feel like the
culmination of months and months worth
of work and then they're out there they
don't change that much do you think no
no they don't they don't change a lot
once we ship those but it's still I do
think that that that team that's it's
like a smaller feature team probably has
that feeling of yeah you know we got
that thing done but even when a
championships the people that were
probably involved in making that
champion have already rolled off to work
on something else okay so it's kind of
like this and like endless grind is
maybe uh I would I wouldn't call it a
grind but because when people are
finishing up a champ they're excited to
go and start concept being the brand-new
champ right they're back on the white
canvas
it's all really exciting but it is like
you just keep rolling so having that
moment of just everyone whether you
should be or not just like we've got to
get this thing out and then break like
total break perspective and then back to
making something we we just we just miss
that we just miss that and I know for me
it's it's something that I I do miss so
whenever we have those moments like we
had that moment with runes reforged when
we shipped the new runes the runes we
work for a league that was one of the
few times that I felt like everybody on
the team was very affected by something
we were shipping and everyone had to
pull together to get it out the door or
a larger group of people to come
together get out the door yeah
have there been moments where you feel
like a sense of defeat or some moment
where you know there was some misstep
that that you really really disappointed
you or just a frustration at write or
anywhere that riot in particularly yeah
yeah they they happen pretty often
because we we are not we are not top
down like whirl out we go and make
decisions every day so there's a lot of
things but I would say if you had to
make me pick one like the one that
haunts me is probably the lead client
update and how some of the things worked
out and we client update where we
[Music]
there's a way that I believe that games
should just be made and that is I
believe that the particularly the
engineers and the artists and designers
should be working on things at the same
time and essentially checking things
into the build right yeah and looking at
it together and I don't think artists
should be polishing PSD s without just
starting to put just whatever they have
into the build so people can feel it and
on LCU we were not able to work like
that for a lot of reasons and it
definitely affected the team and the
morale of the team and I I have a lot of
regrets there because I I can't I always
feel like there was probably more that I
could have done to support the artists
as far as how that team was working yeah
just a situation where the project like
didn't didn't work out the way that you
had hoped from like a management
effective almost management but the
results also in the results because
there was a lot of work that was ended
up she's ended up left on the like the
cutting room floor like we we and mostly
it was just because of the way that we
were working you know if we were
checking an artwork at the same time as
we were like with the engineers and
playing playing with them and talking
about it I think we wouldn't have wasted
so much work and we would have found a
lot of problems earlier on and I I was
on that team for a long time and when my
role increased I kind of pulled myself
off the team and by the way the people
that were on the team were great I just
I feel a lot of regrets for how the last
months went down there I feel like I
could have helped yeah
conversely what are the moments in which
you feel because you said it is a
struggle sometimes because you don't
always feel a sense of completion but
when do you feel that moment of success
like what allows you to really feel like
you've done what you wanted to do I
think that again I'm gonna bring up the
the runes work the rework of runes I
think that was a really big moment for
the team it's it was just one of those
moments where I feel like everybody
pulled it together to do something that
felt extremely risky like very very
risky and if we missed our window we
weren't going to get to ship it for like
another year so it's one of those times
that we had a real deadline it felt like
a scary deadline and we knew if we
screwed it up it would screw up the game
and players would be you know burning
effigies of us if yes something like
that up so there was there was real
pressure on all of us to get it right so
that was I think one of the most
satisfying things that just happened
recently so it's quite fresh in my mind
but we we had many debates on the team
about the direction of that and like
some super heated debates where people
went home kind of mad at each other and
frustrated with each other but when it
went out and we saw how players
responded to it felt very good you know
there's a lot of a lot of people walking
by each other's desks being like thank
you and it was great working with you
and like this moment of like we did it
and that the team that worked on that
they just they did a fantastic job so
that is why probably one of the moments
that I was the most proud of being on
league it's it's very interesting to me
that that's the one that you choose I
was talking to Nathan plow before and he
also wears reports just like a big
moment for yeah for him and something he
was particularly proud of but I think
for a lot of people they would expect
you know you sit down with somebody
who's ahead of Artin they'd say oh this
big cinematic or like this champion in
particular or this one thing like you're
you're literally talking about something
which impacts everyone playing the game
right it's almost more of like a UI
thing right like it's a an incline
experience I think a lot of people would
say well that's that's not nearly as
sexy as like some big cinematic or some
crazy champion reveal but that's that's
something that really sticks with you it
does because I think when you the thing
about making video game art is that it's
really about exposing the game design
first and foremost and then of course
the more immersion right you wanna have
people feel immersed in the game and art
is a big part of that art in audio and
but the best game art is art that is in
some way or another serving up gameplay
mechanics and gameplay concepts and a
way that you understand like okay this
champion is a brute or I'm supposed to
click on this thing now I'm supposed to
make these types of choices so I'm proud
of that work because it was a real
combination to me of design and art and
engineering all the different all the
different disciplines coming together to
make this thing that affects every
single game no matter what champion you
play which is why it's such high stakes
right so it's that's why I'm very proud
of that you and your team make decisions
that impact the way that fans interact
with your game like every day there's
this new fan art that comes out there
are cosplays that are really like the
incarnation of decisions you guys have
made what does that experience like for
you is there is there ever a moment
where you get kind of a big ego because
you're like look at all those people
dressed up as characters that I helped
make you know like it must be
right there's so many people and in
different parts of the world are
interacting and inspired by the art that
your team is making mm-hmm you know I
will I I really mean this I think the
whole team feels humbled and flattered
it's not hey look at these people
dressing up like our champions it's
often the opposite and it is not
uncommon to see great cosplay go around
on slack channels and people are like
look at this this is amazing or I went
to a show and look at this person and
look at like look at this great like fan
art we have fan art hanging on the walls
we love this so there's a lot of fan art
that we find incredibly inspiring
especially because we don't always have
time to just do story pieces about our
champions and illustrations but our
players do and sometimes they'll end up
fleshing out some like relationships and
story backgrounds that we just don't
necessarily have time to do it in a way
that's charming and beautiful so I think
that for the team there's just a lot of
appreciation and for me too I absolutely
love like when Zoey came out because
that was a big deal for us because Zoey
was quite a controversial champion and
because you're asking my number two it
probably would have been Zoe as far as
things that I'm proud of but that was a
very controversial champion and the like
the moment we announced her there was so
there was fan art like the end of the
first day and the whole team was sending
it around and they were so happy because
there was always questions about if we
had taken her too far so seeing the
players respond to her like that was
actually a huge boost to our confidence
why was Zoe such a controversial
champion I've heard this sort of hinted
at elsewhere but it's it's interesting
to me because I feel like Zoe came out
with such universal acclaim that it's
it's interesting to me that behind the
scenes there was like conversation about
sort of the art or at least the
character of Zoe
yeah the thematics yeah for sure so Zoe
is some is a champion I am really proud
of too but just so E is she's a cute
bubbly
little girl and right from the beginning
that's what the team wanted her to be
they
felt that we were missing that in the
midlane we needed to have like somebody
that was looks like and they said we
need somebody was just bubbly and some
people just want to play champion that's
having a good time and I think that she
ended up being very colorful and
extremely playful maybe even more so
than we originally thought of we kind of
were that givers this cosmic child and
and slowly she became like more and more
bubbly and funny and almost taunting
other champions in lane and I think that
it
Sybilla felt we'd gone a little bit too
far maybe she didn't belong in the world
like she was a little bit too cute and
too colorful and too bubbly so yeah
there was controversy around her
internally and certainly and by the way
you know I go around and ask other
rioters like what do you think do you
think she belongs in the game and it
some people I trust a lot were like I
don't think she she fits she doesn't she
doesn't seem like she fits to me like
you guys taking it too far
and we did have players give us the same
feedback when we first started to reveal
so way that maybe she was just like had
we lost our minds so but I am very proud
of her because I do think now she was
absolutely accepted and when we look at
like how players have responded her to
her worldwide it's been overwhelmingly
positive yeah do you do a little victory
lap whenever that happens sort of a you
guys weren't sure about this but it
worked out ok we yeah yeah actually we
did I'm ashamed to say that we were
really proud when we saw that the the
response from players because it was
even more positive we hoped it was gonna
be positive it was even more positive
than we thought it was going to be what
would you say like what is the thing
that you think people should know about
riot as a company now that you've been
here for so long you know everybody has
their opinions outward ideas about it
but like what what is unique about riot
or what really stands out what do you
think people should know I think that
truly we are all gamers that is really
the thing that's something I love about
being here I really mean that I love it
so much everybody here plays games and I
mean all types of games we play video
games we play board games we play D&D we
all still play all these games and I do
think that it affects
how we think about making games because
we all appreciate games so much
so there's I've worked with a lot of
developers that make beautiful games
that aren't necessarily playing them and
I think it is a different type of
culture when everybody is playing them
all the time it's like something that
you can bond with all of your co-workers
but also I hope it's something that
gives players trust in us because and
but I'm not trying to say that just
because you play games you're great at
making them but if you play them you
care about the experience of a player so
when you're making decisions you do
think about how it's going to affect the
person playing the game there's a lot of
games that I play that I get super
frustrated playing because I play all
the time and I think to myself I'm never
going to do this to players if I ever
make a game and I think a lot of writers
think the same way maybe more than any
other you know like I meet people who
want to make design I meet people who
want to to work in eSports or whatever I
meet endless amount of people who want
to be artists on video games they love
the idea of helping to create characters
or splash art or and stuff they really
like there's so many passionate
up-and-coming artists who really want to
work at a video company and a lot of
these people really want to know like
what is the pathway like what are the
steps how do you get in you know is
there other courses you should take is
there and I'm sure you get this question
a ton but what what do you think you
know for the people who do want to work
in an art department at a video game
company or even specifically it right
what should those people be doing so if
you if you don't if you don't have any
formal training I think that getting
some formal training would be helpful
and when I say that I mean I I wouldn't
recommend necessarily a game art school
I think people just need to learn
foundations and that's just like color
theory just basic drawing skills that
that's normally what I recommend is
don't worry about going to a game school
just worry about learning your
foundation skills and then play a lot of
games and then make your own game art
and that's that's it I mean the way
you get into the industry is by making
the thing like figuring out how to solve
those problems so I think when somebody
wants to be a game artist though the
most important thing that they have to
understand is that this isn't just we're
not just painting we're not just making
any characters that we want you have to
be a designer you have to love design
and you have to love the constraints
that design introduces into your art and
solving those types of problems so being
a great problem solver if you just want
to make your own art it's going to be
hard to be in the games industry because
you're gonna make art that isn't going
to help people understand what they need
to do in the game they're not gonna
understand the type of character that
they're playing or the kind of character
that they're facing if it's an enemy so
you have to absolutely love those types
of constraints and love having like
thinking in a more I guess like a having
a design state of mind when you're when
you're creating art so that's would be
my recommendation a final question here
because you are newly minted as the head
of art for all of Riot Games where where
do you want to take the company from an
artistic perspective and the next couple
of years like what would you like to see
what would you like to build out
obviously there are unannounced projects
I'm sure you can't talk about but
ultimately like I'm sure you have high
level goals or aspirations for the
company from just an art perspective
that's gonna be a hard question for me
to answer sure it's like we have a bunch
of products we want to ship and it's
like what is the shape of the art
department what is the shape of the
talent that we need to have in-house to
be able to deliver on those products and
our future direction and because I can't
talk to you about that in depth it's
hard for me to explain the like
ultimately where that's going but I can
say some things is that we're not gonna
we're not gonna sacrifice quality and
we're always going to put resonance
above everything else and that's part of
quality to us resonance meaning that
we're always going to make things that
resonate with the players we're never
going to be an art department that's
just off painting something because we
think it's beautiful
we're never gonna change it about
ourselves we're always going to be
people who are like hey we love this
kind of game these are who the players
are for this type of game what is the
kind of artwork what is the type of like
immersion that
to create here that's going to excite
our players so that won't ever change
but the rest of it I have to tell you is
a little TBD yeah
well I'm excited to find out thank you
so much for seeing down with me today I
really push
you